= On Bus Arbitration on the Unibus and QBUS
David Bridgham <dab@froghouse.org>
April 2017

== Introduction

While working on implementing a QBUS device on an FPGA we reached a point of writing the
Verilog code for the bus arbitration.  In one particular place in the code we could see,
plain as day, that there was a race condition.  This triggered a vague memory from years
ago of being told about how there was a design flaw in the Unibus that could, on rare
occasion, lead to a bus-arbitration failure, and that this was discovered and fixed in the
QBUS design.

So here was the problem we had heard about all those years ago, clear in the Verilog code,
and that lead to an effort to understand the problem and find a workable solution.  This
paper is our attempt to document the results for the benefit of anyone who follows.  As
far as we know, this knowledge was passed word-of-mouth within the DEC community and has
not been written down until now.

== Bus Arbitration

We assume the reader has some knowledge of the Unibus and QBUS but may not know in detail
how bus arbitration works on these two buses.  For those details, refer to DEC's
http://www.bitsavers.org/pdf/dec/pdp11/handbooks/PDP11_BusHandbook1979.pdf[PDP-11 Bus
Handbook].
footnote:[http://www.bitsavers.org/pdf/dec/pdp11/handbooks/PDP11_BusHandbook1979.pdf]
It covers both the Unibus and QBUS and we will refer to timing diagrams by
page number in that reference.

For anyone actually working with these buses, it's worth your time to refer to multiple
sources for the bus description.  DEC's specs are pretty good but they learned things over
time and occasionally had editing errors.  Another take on the Unibus is found in
http://www.bitsavers.org/pdf/dec/unibus/UnibusSpec1979.pdf[PDP-11 Unibus Design
Description]
footnote:[http://www.bitsavers.org/pdf/dec/unibus/UnibusSpec1979.pdf]
and a later description of the QBUS (which has some details about block mode
transfers that I haven't seen elsewhere) is found in Appendix F of the
http://www.bitsavers.org/pdf/dec/vax/680/EK-KA680-TM-001_KA680_TechMan.pdf[KA680 CPU
Module Technical Manual].
footnote:[http://www.bitsavers.org/pdf/dec/vax/680/EK-KA680-TM-001_KA680_TechMan.pdf]

=== General Description

A computer bus connects a processor (sometimes multiple processors) and peripheral devices
together and allows data transfers between the various components.  As a general rule, one
and only one device may be in control of the bus at any time.  Usually this would be the
processor, reading and writing to memory and I/O devices as it executes instructions, but
from time to time it is useful to hand off this bus-master role to other devices in the
system, either so they can access memory directly (DMA) or so they can interrupt the
processor and give it an interrupt vector.

The mechanism whereby the processor hands over control of the bus to exactly one device is
called bus arbitration.  Computer designers have invented a variety of means of doing this
arbitration but a generic description of how DEC does it on the Unibus and QBUS follows.

A device requesting the bus asserts a common open-collector signal (wired OR) to the
processor.  When the processor sees this and is ready, the bus arbitration circuitry in
the processor asserts a bus grant line that is daisy-chained down the bus (i.e. wired from
an 'out' pin on one slot to an 'in' pin on the next sequential slot, for every pair of
adjacent slots).

Each device that is not requesting the bus simply repeats the bus grant signal along.  The
first device that is requesting the bus does not repeat the bus grant signal and assumes
that it now has exclusive use of the bus.  It asserts an acknowledgment back to the
processor, and asserts its interrupt vector, or begins DMA operations as appropriate.

=== Detailed Descriptions

Each of the four combinations of Unibus vs. QBUS and DMA vs. interrupts has little
variations from that general description so we'll briefly introduce those here.  All the
bus signals mentioned below, except the grants, are, like the request line, also common
open-collector signal (wired-OR); i.e. they are broadcast to all devices on the bus.

==== Unibus Non-Processor Grant

The Unibus NPG Arbitration Sequence -- description starting on page 36 -- follows the
general description pretty closely.  It allows a device to become bus master in order to
perform DMA operations.  To start, a device requests the bus by asserting NPR.  The bus
arbitrator responds, when it's ready, by asserting the daisy-chained signal NPG.  The
requesting device captures NPG (doesn't pass it along to devices further down the chain)
and asserts SACK to acknowledge the bus-grant; the arbitrator negates NPG when it sees
that acknowledgment.  Important note: the requesting device must not grab NPG if it's
already passing it along for some other device.  More on this later.

When the bus is idle (BBSY, NPG, and SSYN are all negated), the requesting device asserts
BBSY and becomes the bus master.  The requesting device now can run data transfer bus
cycles.  When it's done, the requesting device negates SACK and BBSY and control reverts
to the processor.  footnote:[The formatting of the 1979 __PDP-11 Bus Handbook__ seems to
have gotten broken here.  Immediately following the description of the NPG Arbitration
Sequence, without any sort of header or break, the text goes into describing how to
generate INTR cycles.  Other Unibus descriptions make it clear that the NPG sequence is
only for DMA and not for interrupts.]

==== Unibus Bus Grant

The Unibus also has a priority Bus Grant system with four priority levels that work just
like NPG but requests are made on BR[7..4] and the daisy-chained bus-grant signals are on
BG[7..4].  Once a device becomes bus master, it may run either data transfer cycles (aka
DMA) or an interrupt cycle to pass its interrupt vector to the processor.

==== QBUS DMA Protocol

The QBUS DMA protocol is described starting on page 115 with the timing diagram Figure 2-8
on page 117.  It follows the general description given above exactly.  A device requesting
the bus for DMA asserts DMR.
footnote:[A note on QBUS signal terminology.  A signal like DMR (DMA Request) may show up with
three different names depending on how this signal is being considered, distinguished by a
prefix letter.  A leading B is the signal on the bus; it is inverted logic, that is an
asserted signal is a low voltage (open-collector signals).  A leading T indicates this is
the signal transmitted by a board and a leading R indicates a received signal; these
signals are not inverted.  In addition, the daisy-chained signals (DMG and IAK) often have
a trailing letter (I or O) to indicate if the signal is coming in (from the processor) or
going out (away from the processor).]
When the processor replies with DMGI the device does not pass this through by asserting
DMGO to the next device (not shown in the timing diagram) but captures that bus grant for
itself and asserts SACK to acknowledge that it has the bus.  It then clears DMR which it
was asserting, goes on to do its DMA operations, and clears SACK when it is done.

==== QBUS Interrupt Protocol

The QBUS interrupt protocol diverges the most from the general description we've been
using.  The basic ideas are the same but there are a bunch of details that differ.  The
big difference is that for Unibus interrupts, the interrupt device becomes bus master and
then runs an INTR bus cycle to send its interrupt vector to the processor.  On the QBUS,
the device runs through the bus arbitration but then the processor reads the interrupt
vector from the device similarly to how the processor would read an I/O register from the
device.

The interrupt protocol description starts on page 117 with the timing diagram figure 2-10
on page 120.  The QBUS has four different interrupt request lines IRQ4, IRQ5, IRQ6, and
IRQ7.  A single shared daisy-chained "bus grant" comes back as IAKI and continues down
the bus as IAKO.

A device that's requesting an interrupt will not pass an incoming IAKI to IAKO, but will
assume that it has won the bus arbitration.  At that point it deasserts its request,
asserts RPLY and its interrupt vector, and then removes RPLY and its interrupt vector
when it sees IAKI go away.

There is a little more complication with not capturing a bus grant if someone at higher
priority is requesting an interrupt but that's not relevant to the discussion here about
bus arbitration.

The other variation that we have skipped until now is the DIN signal.  We will come back
to this but, for now, just note that DIN is asserted with SYNC not asserted a minimum of
150ns before IAKI is asserted.  This provides the device advance notice that an interrupt
bus grant is coming soon.

== The Problem

Now we focus in on just how a device decides if it is going to pass the bus grant signal
through, or capture it for itself, thereby deciding that it has won the arbitration.  This
decision of whether to pass the bus grant signal or not is where the problem arises.  We
will use the QBUS DMA signal names to be specific in the examples.

The first naive approach is that it is a simple AND gate.  If bus grant comes in and this
device is not requesting the bus, pass the signal through.  In Verilog:

    assign TDMGO = RDMGI & ~bus_request;

In this example, the bus_request signal is generated internally by the device whenever it
decides it wants to acquire the bus for DMA operations.  It is sure a nice,
straightforward implementation but of course if that were all there was to it, I wouldn't
be writing this paper and you wouldn't be reading it.

Consider that the device can decide it wants the bus at any arbitrary time relative to
whatever the processor is doing.  So it is possible that the bus grant may come through as
a result of a down-steam device's request just before this device asserts bus_request.  In
that case, TDMGO is asserted briefly and then the device "takes it back".

Besides being downright rude, this can easily result in two devices both thinking that
they own the bus and chaos ensures when they both start running DMA operations.  Given the
design of the Unibus and QBUS with open-collector bus drivers this is unlikely to let out
the magic smoke but scrambling memory or the data on your disk is almost guaranteed.

The fix, you think, is to latch the fact that you passed through bus grant so you never
"take it back".  Exactly right.  Here is the Verilog for this:

----
always @(posedge RDMGI, posedge RINIT, posedge finished) begin
   if (RINIT || finished)
     won_arbitration <= 0;
   else
     won_arbitration <= bus_request;
end
    
assign TDMGO = RDMGI & ~won_arbitration;
----

In this, finished is a signal from the DMA state machine that gets asserted when DMA
operations are complete.  This will synthesize to something like this:

image::grant1.png[]

=== Meta-stability

Now we have a circuit that is an
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arbiter_(electronics)[arbiter].
footnote:[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arbiter_(electronics)]
footnote:[http://gunkies.org/wiki/Arbiter]
Since we are doing bus
arbitration, that should be no surprise.  The flip-flop is determining if the positive
edge of RDMGI happens before bus_request goes high.  Flip-flops have specifications called
their setup and hold times.  The data input to the flip-flop must be valid at least the
setup time before the clock and must remain valid at least hold time after the clock
otherwise the flip-flop may enter a
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metastability_in_electronics[meta-stable state].
footnote:[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metastability_in_electronics]
footnote:[http://gunkies.org/wiki/Meta-stability]

A latch is a circuit with feedback -- i.e. an output is connected back to an input. In line
with the axiom that 'digital circuits are made out of analog parts', this feedback is not
digital (i.e. restricted to '0' or '1'), but may be any intermediate voltage. Generally,
if the output is 'toward' one of those two values, the circuit moves quickly (via
feedback) all the way to that value. However, if it is balanced precisely in the middle,
it may take a while before it fluctuates to one side or the other, and then rapidly moves
to that value.

Note that there is no way to avoid this situation (and considerable theoretical work has
gone into studying it, and 'proves' that there is no solution). The best one can do is
create circuits that ask 'is it still trying to decide', and if so, wait.

Since bus_request can happen at any time relative to bus grant (RDMGI), these setup and
hold times cannot be guaranteed and the output of the arbiter may go meta-stable.  This is
a fundamental property of any arbiter.  The fix is to wait a while to let the
meta-stability settle out.  While there is no time interval you can specify that guarantees
success, the longer you wait the better your chances and in reality it almost always does
settle out pretty quickly.

The key though is that you should not use the arbitration output immediately, and this
circuit does use it immediately to gate the pass-through of RDMGI to TDMGO.  In other
words, it can result in a short pulse of grant being passed through, so that two devices
decide that they won the bus arbitration and chaos reigns as described previously.

=== Glitching

Turns out the circuit here also has another problem; it glitches TDMGO when RDMGI comes in
if bus_request is asserted.  The short explanation of this glitch is that whenever an
input signal travels two paths to an output signal, those two paths may take differing
times and so you want to think about glitches.

In more detail, if the circuit is quiescent then RDGMI is low and won_arbitration is low
which makes [overline]#Q# high, therefore TDMGO is low.  If bus_request is high and RDMGI
goes high, [overline]#Q# is still high briefly so TDMGO will go high.  In a very short
interval, the propagation time of the flip-flop, [overline]#Q# will go low and TDMGO will
go low again.  However, this has glitched TDMGO and some device downstream that is also
requesting DMA may think it just won the bus arbitration.

The fix we will apply for the meta-stability problem will fix the glitch as well.

== The Solution

=== The Idea

The basic idea is simple.  Since the problem comes from trying to use the arbitration
output immediately, we should wait a while before using it.  If we could do the
arbitration some time before the bus grant signal arrived then we could let any
meta-stability settle out before we had to pass gate bus grant through or not using that
pre-decided answer.

=== QBUS DMA

For the bus grant on Unibus or DMA on the QBUS, there is no early indication that a bus
grant is soon to come but we can get that effect by running the bus grant through a delay.
The un-delayed signal clocks the arbiter and the delayed bus grant is passed down the
chain or not.

This circuit looks like this:

image::grant3.png[]

Now the, possibly meta-stable, output of the Arbiter will not be sent out to TDMGO until
'delay' after RDMGI's positive edge, by which time it ought to have stabilized on an
answer to the question of whether bus_request or RDMGI happened first.  The
won_arbitration needs this type of protection as well.

Since delay lines are not available in most FPGAs, we can use a bucket-brigade of
flip-flops to get a similar effect.  Note that this bucket-brigade is the same circuit as
a synchronizer used when signals travel between clock domains.

Here is the Verilog for this final design with its circuit:

----
always @(posedge RDMGI, posedge RINIT, posedge finished) begin
   if (RINIT || finished)
     won_arbitration <= 0;
   else
     won_arbitration <= bus_request;
end

reg RDMGIra[1:0];
reg RDMGI_delayed = RDMGIra[1];
always @(posedge CLK)
  RDMGIra <= { RDMGIra[0], RDMGI };

assign TDMGO = RDMGI_delayed & ~won_arbitration;
----

image::grant4.png[]

Obviously this adds delay to the bus grant chain at each device in the chain.  How much of
a problem is this?  From page 117:

____
Propagation delay from BDMGI L to BDMGO L must be less than 500 ns per LSI-11 bus slot.
Since this delay directly affects system performance, it should be kept as short as
possible.
____

With a 20MHz clock, two flip-flops will add between 50ns and 100ns of delay depending on
the phase relationship of the incoming bus grant with the clock, well within the spec.
footnote:[We are unable to find the Unibus spec for this delay.]
Also, if the reader would consider the simplified logic diagram of DEC's DC010 Direct
Memory Access Logic chip
footnote:[http://bitsavers.trailing-edge.com/pdf/dec/qbus/Chipkit_Users_Manual_1982.pdf[ChipKit Users Manual] pg.43 Figure 18]
, they can see the delay line in the BDMGI to BDMGO logic chain.  From the timing table,
the total propagation delay high-low is between 95 and 220ns while low-high is between 15
and 60ns.footnote:[Ibid pg.54 Table 10] Apparently DEC considered delays of this order
acceptable in practice as well as in theory.

=== Unibus Interrupts

We have used the QBUS for our specifics so far but it all works the same on the Unibus.
However, an interesting difference between the QBUS and Unibus happens once you've won
arbitration and want to generate an interrupt.  On the Unibus, the device runs an INTR bus
cycle that basically writes the interrupt vector into the interrupt fielding processor.
On the QBUS, after the arbitrator has granted the bus to some device requesting an
interrupt, the processor runs what looks very much like a DATI cycle (bus read) to read
the interrupt vector from the device.

This has a couple interesting results which comes back to touch on the bus arbitration
question.  First, implementing interrupts on a Unibus device needs a state machine --
simpler than the DMA state machine but a state machine nonetheless -- to sequence through
the bus signals needed to run the INTR bus cycle.  On the QBUS, interrupt processing on a
slave device is simply another register read.  It's driven off RDIN and won_arbitration
rather than an address match but it's otherwise very similar.  No state machine is needed,
just combinational logic.

=== QBUS Interrupts

In the QBUS interrupt protocol,as mentioned earlier, DIN is asserted at least 150ns before
bus grant (RIAKI).  So if we clock the arbitrator flip-flop on RDIN, we get a minimum of
150ns to let any meta-stability clear before we use the signal.  The Verilog for this is:

----
always @(posedge RDIN, posedge RINIT) begin
   if (RINIT)
     interrupt_mine <= 0;
   else if (irql && !irq_higher)
     interrupt_mine <= 1;
   else
     interrupt_mine <= 0;
end

assign TIAKO = RIAKI & ~interrupt_mine;
----

This should look very similar to the bus grant logic we considered previously with the
change that we clock the arbiter flip-flop off RDIN while we pass RIAKI rather than doing
both off the bus grant.  The irql signal is a latched version of the internal interrupt
request line on the device and irq_higher is a calculation among the four QBUS interrupt
request lines to make sure some higher priority interrupt isn't currently being requested.

The synthesized circuit would look something like this (the irq_higher part removed as it
just muddies the picture):

image::grant2.png[]

Again, the output of the Arbiter may be meta-stable for a little while so those outputs
should not be used until they have time to settle.  Gating the output with RIAKI provides
that protection.  The interrupt_mine signal gets this protection as well, as you'll see
below.

One bit of subtlety here is that only RDIN clocks the Arbiter.  Since RDIN is also used to
signal DATI (data read) cycles on the QBUS, doesn't that confuse things?  When RDIN is
asserted and RSYNC is not, that is the early indication that the bus arbitrator is about
to assert RIAKI to read an interrupt vector.  So why are we not including RSYNC in here
somewhere?  Well, we could but it turns out it doesn't matter.  Since the output of the
Arbiter here is only used when RIAKI gets asserted, clocking in irql on every RDIN
transition doesn't hurt anything and it simplifies the circuit a little.  Also, once our
interrupt vector is read and irql is negated, the next RDIN will clear the Arbiter
flip-flop naturally so we don't have to add some circuitry to deal with that.

This is only a small piece of the QBUS interrupt circuitry and on the QBUS, unlike on
the Unibus, the rest of the interrupt processing is a part of the bus arbitration
sequence.  So here is that arbitrator in a little more context.  The interrupt_request
line comes from the device when it wants to trigger an interrupt; TIRQn expands to the
different IRQ signals depending on what priority this device is set to; and
assert_vector is a signal to the register read circuitry that causes it to put the
interrupt vector on the BDAL lines rather than I/O register contents.

When RIAKI comes in, we either pass it through to TIKAO or assert our own interrupt vector
as determined by the bus arbitration flip-flop which was clocked off RDIN at least 150ns
earlier.  If we assert the interrupt vector, then we also clear the interrupt request
flip-flop and negate TIRQn.

image::qint2.png[]

== Conclusion

There is no revealed wisdom here.  These are just the opinions of the author and not
inside information from DEC engineers.  We present the information to aid those in the
community who experiment with their own device designs.  We welcome feedback and
discussion to make this information as complete and correct as possible.

== Acknowledgments

The author gratefully acknowledges the assistance of Noel Chiappa in working through
questions about how the Unibus and QBUS work as well as reviewing this paper not to
mention starting the QSIC project
footnote:[http://pdp10.froghouse.org/qsic/html/overview.html]
that lead to discovering all this stuff in the first place.
